README.md, before:

# Spatter  

This is a microbenchmark for timing Gather/Scatter kernels on CPUs and GPUs. View the [source](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter), and please submit an issue on Github if you run into any issues. 

![Build Status](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)


## Purpose 
For some time now, memory has been the bottleneck in modern computers. As CPUs grow more memory hungry due to increased clock speeds, an increased number of cores, and larger vector units, memory bandwidth and latency continue to stagnate.  While increasingly complex cache hierarchies have helped ease this problem, they are best suited for regular memory accesses with large amounts of locality. However, there are many programs which do not display regular memory patterns and do have much data reuse, and thus do not benefit from such hierarchies. Irregular programs, which include many sparse matrix and graph algorithms, drive us to search for new approaches to better utilize whatever memory bandwidth is available.

With this benchmark, we aim to characterize the performance of memory systems in a new way. We want to be able to make comparisons across architectures about how well data can be rearranged, and we want to be able to use benchmark results to predict the runtimes of sparse algorithms on these various architectures.

<!---
### Kernels
Spatter supports the following primitives:

Scatter:
    `A[j[:]] = B[:]`

Gather:
    `A[:] = B[i[:]]`

S+G:
    `A[j[:]] = B[i[:]]`
    
![Gather Comparison](.resources/sgexplain2.png?raw=true "Gather Comparison")
    
This diagram depicts the full Scatter+Gather. Gather performs on the top half of this diagram and Scatter the second half.

-->

## Building
CMake is required to build Spatter

To build with CMake from the main source directory:
```
./configure/configure_omp_gnu
cd build_omp_gnu
make
```
or use one of the other configure scripts to compile with different backends. You might also need to initialize `git submodule` before building using:
```
git submodule init
git submodule update
```

<!--

### Quick Start

The only required argument to spatter is the amount of data to move. It will guess all other arguments such as kernel and device. However, this produces data for a single sparsity (default is 1) and doesn't do any tuning. To obtain more useful output, continue on to the next section.

```
./spatter -l 2048
```

### Run Your Own Platform Comparison

You can quickly compare one of your platforms to some of the GPUs we have tested on. We will add much more flexibility to this in the future, but for now, we will assume you are using CUDA. 

You must have R installed to generate the plot. 

Steps:

1. You will need the bandwidth of your GPU. If you don't know it, you can go to `tests/run_babel_stream.sh` and run it. The results will be in `tests/BabelStream-3.3/babelstream_DEVICENAME_cuda.txt`. Note the max copy bandwidth.

2. Go to your build folder (`build_cuda`) and run `sparsity_test.sh`. This will take a while. (But it will be optimized soon!) 

3. Go to the `quickstart` directory (sibling of your build directory) and run `./gather_comparison.sh ../build_cuda/sg_sparse_roofline_cuda_user_GATHER.ssv BANDWIDTH`, where `BANDWIDTH` is the bandwidth from step 1. 

4. This will produce `gather_comparison.eps` in the `quickstart` directory. Your device will be called "USER", and will be colored orange.

![Gather Comparison](.resources/gather_comparison_transparant.png?raw=true "Gather Comparison")

-->

## Running Spatter
Spatter is highly configurable, but a basic run is rather simple. You must at least specify a pattern with `-p` and you should probably speficy a length with `-l`. Spatter will print out the time it took to perform the number of gathers you requested with `-l` and it will print out a bandwwidth. As a sanity check, the following run should give you a number close to your STREAM bandwith, although we note that this is a one-sided operation - it only performs gathers (reads).
```
./spatter -pUNIFORM:8:1 -l$((2**24))
```


### Arguments
Spatter has a large number of arguments, broken up into two types. Backend configuration options are specied once for each invocation of Spatter, and benchmark configuration arguments can be supplied in bulk using a `.json` file. These arguments may be specified in any order, but it may be simpler if you list all of your backend arguments first. The only reuired argument to Spatter is `-p`, a benchmark configuration argument.

#### Backend Configuration
Backend configuration arguments determine which language and device will be used. Spatter can be compiled with support for multiple backends, so it is possible to choose between backends and devices at runtime. Spatter will attempt intelliigently pick a backend for you, so you may not need to worry about these arguments at all! It is only necessary to specifiy which `--backend` you want if you have compiled with support for more than one, and it is only necessary to specify which `--device` you want if there would be ambiguity (for instance, if you have more than one GPU available). If you want to see what Spatter has chosen for you, you can run with `--verbose`.

```
./spatter --help
Usage:
 [-qiac] [--help] [--verbose] [--validate] -p <pattern> [-k <kernel>] [-o <s>] [-d <delta[,delta,...]>] [-l <n>] [-w <n>] [-R <n>] [-t <n>] [-v <n>] [-z <n>] [-m <n>] [-n <name>] [-s [<n>]] [-b <backend>] [--cl-platform=<platform>] [--cl-device=<device>] [-f <FILE>] [--morton=<n>] [--hilbert=<n>] [--roblock=<n>] [--stride=<n>] [--papi=<s>]
 --help                       Displays info about commands and then exits.
 --verbose                    Print info about default arguments that you have not overridden.
 -q, --no-print-header        Do not print header information.
 -i, --interactive            Pick the platform and the device interactively.
 --validate                   TODO
 -a, --aggregate              Report a minimum time for all runs of a given configuration for 2 or more runs. [Default 1] (Do not use with PAPI)
 -c, --compress               TODO
 -p, --pattern=<pattern>      Specify either a a built-in pattern (i.e. UNIFORM), a custom pattern (i.e. 1,2,3,4), or a path to a json file with a run-configuration.
 -k, --kernel-name=<kernel>   Specify the kernel you want to run. [Default: Gather]
 -o, --op=<s>                 TODO
 -d, --delta=<delta[,delta,...]> Specify one or more deltas. [Default: 8]
 -l, --count=<n>              Number of Gathers or Scatters to perform.
 -w, --wrap=<n>               Number of independent slots in the small buffer (source buffer if Scatter, Target buffer if Gather. [Default: 1]
 -R, --runs=<n>               Number of times to repeat execution of the kernel. [Default: 10]
 -t, --omp-threads=<n>        Number of OpenMP threads. [Default: OMP_MAX_THREADS]
 -v, --vector-len=<n>         TODO
 -z, --local-work-size=<n>    Numer of Gathers or Scatters performed by each thread on a GPU.
 -m, --shared-memory=<n>      Amount of dummy shared memory to allocate on GPUs (used for occupancy control).
 -n, --name=<name>            Specify and name this configuration in the output.
 -s, --random=[<n>]           Sets the seed, or uses a random one if no seed is specified.
 -b, --backend=<backend>      Specify a backend: OpenCL, OpenMP, CUDA, or Serial.
 --cl-platform=<platform>     Specify platform if using OpenCL (case-insensitive, fuzzy matching).
 --cl-device=<device>         Specify device if using OpenCL (case-insensitive, fuzzy matching).
 -f, --kernel-file=<FILE>     Specify the location of an OpenCL kernel file.
```
        
        

#### Benchmark Configuration
The second set of arguments are benchmark  configuration arguments, and these define how the benchmark is run, including the pattern used and the amount of data that is moved. These arguments are special because you can supply multiple sets of benchmark configurations to spatter so that many runs can be performed at once. This way, memory is allocated only once which greatly reduces the amount of time needed to collect a large amount of data.

```
./spatter <arguments>
    -p, --pattern=<Built-in pattern>
    -p, --pattern=FILE=<config file>
        See the section on Patterns. 
    -k, --kernel-name=<kernel>
        Specify the kernel you want to run [Default: Gather]
    -d, --delta=<delta[,delta,...]>
        Specify one or more deltas [Default: 8]
    -l, --count=<N>
        Number of Gathers or Scatters to do
    -w, --wrap=<N>
        Number of independent slots in the "small" buffer (Source buffer if Scatter, Target buffer if Gather) [Default: 1]
    -R, --runs=<N>
        Number of times to repeat execution of the kernel. [Default: 10]
    -t, --omp-thread=<N>
        Number of OpenMP threads [Default: OMP_MAX_THREADS]
    -z, --local-work-size=<N>
        Number of Gathers or Scatters performed by each thread on a GPU
    -s, --shared-memory=<N>
        Amount of dummy shared memory to allocate on GPUs (used for occupancy control)
    -n, --name=<NAME>
        Specify and name used to identify this configuration in the output
    
```

#### Pattern
Spatter supports two built-in pattners, uniform stride and mostly stride-1. 

```
Uniform:
    -pUNIFORM:<length>:<gap>
        Length is the length of the pattern, and gap is the size of each jump. 
        E.g. UNIFORM:8:4 -> [0,4,8,12,16,20,24,28]
Mostly Stride-1
    -pMS1:<length>:<gap_locations>:<gap(s)>
        Length is the length of the pattern, gap_locations are the places within the pattern
        with a non-1 gap, and gap are the size of those gaps.  If more than one gap_location 
        is specified, but only a single gap, the gap will be reused. 
        E.g. MS1:8:4:32 -> [0,1,2,3,35,36,37,38]
             MS1:8:2,3:20 -> [0,1,21,41,42,43,44,45]
             MS1:8:2,3:20,22 -> [0,1,21,43,44,45,46,47]
Laplacian:
    -pLAPLACIAN:<dimension>:<pseudo_order>:<problem_size>
        dimension: The dimension of the stencil
        pseudo_order: The length of a branch of the stencil
        problem_size: The length of each dimension of the problem
        E.g. LAPLACIAN:1:1:100 -> [0,1,2] // 3-point stencil
             LAPLACIAN:2:1:100 -> [0,99,100,101,200] // 5-point stencil
             LAPLACIAN:2:2:100 -> [0,100,198,199,200,201,202,300,400] // 9-point stencil
             LAPLACIAN:3:1:100 -> [0,9900,9999,10000,10001,10100,20000] // 7-point stencil (3D)

        The default delta is 1 for Laplacian patterns

```

You can also simply specify your own pattern, of any length.
```
Custom:
    -p1,2,4,8,16,32
    -p4,4,4,4,4
```

#### JSON Inputs for Multiple Configurations
You may specify multiple sets of benchmark configuration options to Spatter inside a JSON file and run them using `./spatter -pFILE=<jsonconfig>.json`. Examples can be found in the `json/` directory. The file format is below. String values should be quoted while numeric values should not be. 
```
[
    {"long-option1":numeric, "long-option2":"string", ...},
    {"long-option1":numeric, "long-option2":"string", ...},
    ...
]

```

As an example of running with an example JSON configuration. Note that results are provided on a per-pattern basis and summary results are provided for all patterns. This is useful for summarizing pattern results that represent an application kernel. 
```
./spatter -pFILE=../json/ustride_small.json                                                  

Running Spatter version 0.0
Compiler: Clang ver. 7.1.0
Compiler Location: /sw/wombat/ARM_Compiler/19.2/opt/arm/arm-hpc-compiler-19.2_Generic-AArch64_RHEL-7_aarch64-1/bin/armclang         
Backend: OPENMP
Aggregate Results? YES

Run Configurations
[ {'name':'UNIFORM:8:1:NR', 'kernel':'Gather', 'pattern':[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7], 'delta':8, 'length':2500, 'agg':10, 'wrap':1, 'threads':112},
  {'name':'UNIFORM:8:2:NR', 'kernel':'Gather', 'pattern':[0,2,4,6,8,10,12,14], 'delta':16, 'length':1250, 'agg':10, 'wrap':1, 'threads':112},
  {'name':'UNIFORM:8:4:NR', 'kernel':'Gather', 'pattern':[0,4,8,12,16,20,24,28], 'delta':32, 'length':625, 'agg':10, 'wrap':1, 'threads':112} ]

config  time(s)      bw(MB/s)
0       0.0008033    199.168
1       0.0007809    102.445
2       0.0007738    51.6945

Min          25%          Med          75%          Max
51.6945      51.6945      102.445      199.168      199.168
H.Mean       H.StdErr
87.9079      26.5821
```

For your convienience, we also provide a python script to help you create configurations quickly. If your json contains arrays, you can pass it into the python script `python/generate_json.py` and it will expand the arrays into multiple configs, each with a single value from the array. Given that you probably don't want your pattern arguments to be expanded like this, they should be specified as python tuples. An example is below. 

```
[
    {"kernel":"Gather", "pattern":(1,2,3,4), "count":[2**i for i in range(3)]}
]
   |
   |
   v
[
    {"kernel":"Gather", "pattern":(1,2,3,4), "count":1},
    {"kernel":"Gather", "pattern":(1,2,3,4), "count":2},
    {"kernel":"Gather", "pattern":(1,2,3,4), "count":4}
]
```

## Publications and Citing Spatter

Please see our latest paper submission on [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.03743) for experimental results and more discussion of the tool. If you use Spatter in your work, please cite it from the accepted copy from [MEMSYS 2020](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3422575.3422794).

Lavin, P., Young, J., Vuduc, R., Riedy, J., Vose, A. and Ernst, D., Evaluating Gather and Scatter Performance on CPUs and GPUs. In The International Symposium on Memory Systems (pp. 209-222). September 2020.

### Other publications
* [SC19 Student Research Competition Poster](https://sc19.supercomputing.org/proceedings/src_poster/src_poster_pages/spostg136.html) ([PDF](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter/wiki/pubs/sc19/plavin_spatter_poster_sc19.pdf))
* [SC19 poster abstract (PDF)](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter/wiki/pubs/sc19/plavin_spatter_abstract_sc19.pdf)

### Slides
* [SC19 Georgia Tech Booth Talk (PDF)](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter/wiki/pubs/sc19/plavin_spatter_booth_talk_sc19.pdf)

Commit message:

README update with new options for kernel=SG

README.md, after:

# Spatter  

This is a microbenchmark for timing Gather/Scatter kernels on CPUs and GPUs. View the [source](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter), and please submit an issue on Github if you run into any issues. 

![Build Status](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)


## Purpose 
For some time now, memory has been the bottleneck in modern computers. As CPUs grow more memory hungry due to increased clock speeds, an increased number of cores, and larger vector units, memory bandwidth and latency continue to stagnate.  While increasingly complex cache hierarchies have helped ease this problem, they are best suited for regular memory accesses with large amounts of locality. However, there are many programs which do not display regular memory patterns and do have much data reuse, and thus do not benefit from such hierarchies. Irregular programs, which include many sparse matrix and graph algorithms, drive us to search for new approaches to better utilize whatever memory bandwidth is available.

With this benchmark, we aim to characterize the performance of memory systems in a new way. We want to be able to make comparisons across architectures about how well data can be rearranged, and we want to be able to use benchmark results to predict the runtimes of sparse algorithms on these various architectures.

<!---
### Kernels
Spatter supports the following primitives:

Scatter:
    `A[j[:]] = B[:]`

Gather:
    `A[:] = B[i[:]]`

S+G:
    `A[j[:]] = B[i[:]]`
    
![Gather Comparison](.resources/sgexplain2.png?raw=true "Gather Comparison")
    
This diagram depicts the full Scatter+Gather. Gather performs on the top half of this diagram and Scatter the second half.

-->

## Building
CMake is required to build Spatter

To build with CMake from the main source directory:
```
./configure/configure_omp_gnu
cd build_omp_gnu
make
```
or use one of the other configure scripts to compile with different backends. You might also need to initialize `git submodule` before building using:
```
git submodule init
git submodule update
```

<!--

### Quick Start

The only required argument to spatter is the amount of data to move. It will guess all other arguments such as kernel and device. However, this produces data for a single sparsity (default is 1) and doesn't do any tuning. To obtain more useful output, continue on to the next section.

```
./spatter -l 2048
```

### Run Your Own Platform Comparison

You can quickly compare one of your platforms to some of the GPUs we have tested on. We will add much more flexibility to this in the future, but for now, we will assume you are using CUDA. 

You must have R installed to generate the plot. 

Steps:

1. You will need the bandwidth of your GPU. If you don't know it, you can go to `tests/run_babel_stream.sh` and run it. The results will be in `tests/BabelStream-3.3/babelstream_DEVICENAME_cuda.txt`. Note the max copy bandwidth.

2. Go to your build folder (`build_cuda`) and run `sparsity_test.sh`. This will take a while. (But it will be optimized soon!) 

3. Go to the `quickstart` directory (sibling of your build directory) and run `./gather_comparison.sh ../build_cuda/sg_sparse_roofline_cuda_user_GATHER.ssv BANDWIDTH`, where `BANDWIDTH` is the bandwidth from step 1. 

4. This will produce `gather_comparison.eps` in the `quickstart` directory. Your device will be called "USER", and will be colored orange.

![Gather Comparison](.resources/gather_comparison_transparant.png?raw=true "Gather Comparison")

-->

## Running Spatter
Spatter is highly configurable, but a basic run is rather simple. You must at least specify a pattern with `-p` and you should probably speficy a length with `-l`. Spatter will print out the time it took to perform the number of gathers you requested with `-l` and it will print out a bandwwidth. As a sanity check, the following run should give you a number close to your STREAM bandwith, although we note that this is a one-sided operation - it only performs gathers (reads).
```
./spatter -pUNIFORM:8:1 -l$((2**24))
```


### Arguments
Spatter has a large number of arguments, broken up into two types. Backend configuration options are specied once for each invocation of Spatter, and benchmark configuration arguments can be supplied in bulk using a `.json` file. These arguments may be specified in any order, but it may be simpler if you list all of your backend arguments first. The only reuired argument to Spatter is `-p`, a benchmark configuration argument.

#### Backend Configuration
Backend configuration arguments determine which language and device will be used. Spatter can be compiled with support for multiple backends, so it is possible to choose between backends and devices at runtime. Spatter will attempt intelliigently pick a backend for you, so you may not need to worry about these arguments at all! It is only necessary to specifiy which `--backend` you want if you have compiled with support for more than one, and it is only necessary to specify which `--device` you want if there would be ambiguity (for instance, if you have more than one GPU available). If you want to see what Spatter has chosen for you, you can run with `--verbose`.

```
./spatter --help
Usage:
 [-qiac] [--help] [--verbose] [--validate] -p <pattern> [-k <kernel>] [-o <s>] [-d <delta[,delta,...]>] [-l <n>] [-w <n>] [-R <n>] [-t <n>] [-v <n>] [-z <n>] [-m <n>] [-n <name>] [-s [<n>]] [-b <backend>] [--cl-platform=<platform>] [--cl-device=<device>] [-f <FILE>] [--morton=<n>] [--hilbert=<n>] [--roblock=<n>] [--stride=<n>] [--papi=<s>]
 --help                       Displays info about commands and then exits.
 --verbose                    Print info about default arguments that you have not overridden.
 -q, --no-print-header        Do not print header information.
 -i, --interactive            Pick the platform and the device interactively.
 --validate                   TODO
 -a, --aggregate              Report a minimum time for all runs of a given configuration for 2 or more runs. [Default 1] (Do not use with PAPI)
 -c, --compress               TODO
 -p, --pattern=<pattern>      Specify either a built-in pattern (i.e. UNIFORM), a custom pattern (i.e. 1,2,3,4), or a path to a json file with a run-configuration.
 -g, --pattern-gather=<pattern> Valid wtih [kernel-name: GS]. Specify either a built-in pattern (i.e. UNIFORM), a custom pattern (i.e. 1,2,3,4), or a path to a json file with a run-configuration.
 -h, --pattern-scatter=<pattern> Valid with [kernel-name: GS]. Specify either a built-in pattern (i.e. UNIFORM), a custom pattern (i.e. 1,2,3,4), or a path to a json file with a run-configuration.
 -k, --kernel-name=<kernel>   Specify the kernel you want to run. [Default: Gather]
 -o, --op=<s>                 TODO
 -d, --delta=<delta[,delta,...]> Specify one or more deltas. [Default: 8]
 -x, --delta gather=<delta[,delta,...]> Specify one or more deltas. [Default: 8]
 -y, --delta scatter=<delta[,delta,...]> Specify one or more deltas. [Default: 8] 
 -l, --count=<n>              Number of Gathers or Scatters to perform.
 -w, --wrap=<n>               Number of independent slots in the small buffer (source buffer if Scatter, Target buffer if Gather. [Default: 1]
 -R, --runs=<n>               Number of times to repeat execution of the kernel. [Default: 10]
 -t, --omp-threads=<n>        Number of OpenMP threads. [Default: OMP_MAX_THREADS]
 -v, --vector-len=<n>         TODO
 -z, --local-work-size=<n>    Numer of Gathers or Scatters performed by each thread on a GPU.
 -m, --shared-memory=<n>      Amount of dummy shared memory to allocate on GPUs (used for occupancy control).
 -n, --name=<name>            Specify and name this configuration in the output.
 -s, --random=[<n>]           Sets the seed, or uses a random one if no seed is specified.
 -b, --backend=<backend>      Specify a backend: OpenCL, OpenMP, CUDA, or Serial.
 --cl-platform=<platform>     Specify platform if using OpenCL (case-insensitive, fuzzy matching).
 --cl-device=<device>         Specify device if using OpenCL (case-insensitive, fuzzy matching).
 -f, --kernel-file=<FILE>     Specify the location of an OpenCL kernel file.
```
        
        

#### Benchmark Configuration
The second set of arguments are benchmark  configuration arguments, and these define how the benchmark is run, including the pattern used and the amount of data that is moved. These arguments are special because you can supply multiple sets of benchmark configurations to spatter so that many runs can be performed at once. This way, memory is allocated only once which greatly reduces the amount of time needed to collect a large amount of data.

```
./spatter <arguments>
    -p, --pattern=<Built-in pattern>
    -p, --pattern=FILE=<config file>
        See the section on Patterns. 
    -g, --pattern-gather=<Built-in pattern>
    -g, --pattern-gather=FILE=<config file>
        See the section on Patterns. (Used with kernel=SG)
    -h, --pattern-scatter=<Built-in pattern>
    -h, --pattern-scatter=FILE=<config file>
        See the section on Patterns. (Used with kernel=SG)
    -k, --kernel-name=<kernel>
        Specify the kernel you want to run [Default: Gather]
    -d, --delta=<delta[,delta,...]>
        Specify one or more deltas [Default: 8]
    -x, --delta-gather=<delta[,delta,...]>
        Specify one or more deltas [Default: 8] (Used with kernel=SG)
    -y --delta-scatter=<delta[,delta,...]>
        Specify one or more deltas [Default: 8] (Used with kernel=SG)
    -l, --count=<N>
        Number of Gathers or Scatters to do
    -w, --wrap=<N>
        Number of independent slots in the "small" buffer (Source buffer if Scatter, Target buffer if Gather) [Default: 1]
    -R, --runs=<N>
        Number of times to repeat execution of the kernel. [Default: 10]
    -t, --omp-thread=<N>
        Number of OpenMP threads [Default: OMP_MAX_THREADS]
    -z, --local-work-size=<N>
        Number of Gathers or Scatters performed by each thread on a GPU
    -s, --shared-memory=<N>
        Amount of dummy shared memory to allocate on GPUs (used for occupancy control)
    -n, --name=<NAME>
        Specify and name used to identify this configuration in the output
    
```

#### Pattern
Spatter supports two built-in pattners, uniform stride and mostly stride-1. 

```
Uniform:
    -pUNIFORM:<length>:<gap>
        Length is the length of the pattern, and gap is the size of each jump. 
        E.g. UNIFORM:8:4 -> [0,4,8,12,16,20,24,28]
Mostly Stride-1
    -pMS1:<length>:<gap_locations>:<gap(s)>
        Length is the length of the pattern, gap_locations are the places within the pattern
        with a non-1 gap, and gap are the size of those gaps.  If more than one gap_location 
        is specified, but only a single gap, the gap will be reused. 
        E.g. MS1:8:4:32 -> [0,1,2,3,35,36,37,38]
             MS1:8:2,3:20 -> [0,1,21,41,42,43,44,45]
             MS1:8:2,3:20,22 -> [0,1,21,43,44,45,46,47]
Laplacian:
    -pLAPLACIAN:<dimension>:<pseudo_order>:<problem_size>
        dimension: The dimension of the stencil
        pseudo_order: The length of a branch of the stencil
        problem_size: The length of each dimension of the problem
        E.g. LAPLACIAN:1:1:100 -> [0,1,2] // 3-point stencil
             LAPLACIAN:2:1:100 -> [0,99,100,101,200] // 5-point stencil
             LAPLACIAN:2:2:100 -> [0,100,198,199,200,201,202,300,400] // 9-point stencil
             LAPLACIAN:3:1:100 -> [0,9900,9999,10000,10001,10100,20000] // 7-point stencil (3D)

        The default delta is 1 for Laplacian patterns

```

You can also simply specify your own pattern, of any length.
```
Custom:
    -p1,2,4,8,16,32
    -p4,4,4,4,4
```

#### JSON Inputs for Multiple Configurations
You may specify multiple sets of benchmark configuration options to Spatter inside a JSON file and run them using `./spatter -pFILE=<jsonconfig>.json`. Examples can be found in the `json/` directory. The file format is below. String values should be quoted while numeric values should not be. 
```
[
    {"long-option1":numeric, "long-option2":"string", ...},
    {"long-option1":numeric, "long-option2":"string", ...},
    ...
]

```

As an example of running with an example JSON configuration. Note that results are provided on a per-pattern basis and summary results are provided for all patterns. This is useful for summarizing pattern results that represent an application kernel. 
```
./spatter -pFILE=../json/ustride_small.json                                                  

Running Spatter version 0.0
Compiler: Clang ver. 7.1.0
Compiler Location: /sw/wombat/ARM_Compiler/19.2/opt/arm/arm-hpc-compiler-19.2_Generic-AArch64_RHEL-7_aarch64-1/bin/armclang         
Backend: OPENMP
Aggregate Results? YES

Run Configurations
[ {'name':'UNIFORM:8:1:NR', 'kernel':'Gather', 'pattern':[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7], 'delta':8, 'length':2500, 'agg':10, 'wrap':1, 'threads':112},
  {'name':'UNIFORM:8:2:NR', 'kernel':'Gather', 'pattern':[0,2,4,6,8,10,12,14], 'delta':16, 'length':1250, 'agg':10, 'wrap':1, 'threads':112},
  {'name':'UNIFORM:8:4:NR', 'kernel':'Gather', 'pattern':[0,4,8,12,16,20,24,28], 'delta':32, 'length':625, 'agg':10, 'wrap':1, 'threads':112} ]

config  time(s)      bw(MB/s)
0       0.0008033    199.168
1       0.0007809    102.445
2       0.0007738    51.6945

Min          25%          Med          75%          Max
51.6945      51.6945      102.445      199.168      199.168
H.Mean       H.StdErr
87.9079      26.5821
```

For your convienience, we also provide a python script to help you create configurations quickly. If your json contains arrays, you can pass it into the python script `python/generate_json.py` and it will expand the arrays into multiple configs, each with a single value from the array. Given that you probably don't want your pattern arguments to be expanded like this, they should be specified as python tuples. An example is below. 

```
[
    {"kernel":"Gather", "pattern":(1,2,3,4), "count":[2**i for i in range(3)]}
]
   |
   |
   v
[
    {"kernel":"Gather", "pattern":(1,2,3,4), "count":1},
    {"kernel":"Gather", "pattern":(1,2,3,4), "count":2},
    {"kernel":"Gather", "pattern":(1,2,3,4), "count":4}
]
```

## Publications and Citing Spatter

Please see our latest paper submission on [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.03743) for experimental results and more discussion of the tool. If you use Spatter in your work, please cite it from the accepted copy from [MEMSYS 2020](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3422575.3422794).

Lavin, P., Young, J., Vuduc, R., Riedy, J., Vose, A. and Ernst, D., Evaluating Gather and Scatter Performance on CPUs and GPUs. In The International Symposium on Memory Systems (pp. 209-222). September 2020.

### Other publications
* [SC19 Student Research Competition Poster](https://sc19.supercomputing.org/proceedings/src_poster/src_poster_pages/spostg136.html) ([PDF](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter/wiki/pubs/sc19/plavin_spatter_poster_sc19.pdf))
* [SC19 poster abstract (PDF)](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter/wiki/pubs/sc19/plavin_spatter_abstract_sc19.pdf)

### Slides
* [SC19 Georgia Tech Booth Talk (PDF)](https://github.com/hpcgarage/spatter/wiki/pubs/sc19/plavin_spatter_booth_talk_sc19.pdf)
